# Grace Hopper Conference 
*October 3-7, 2012 in Baltimore, MD*

* [Finding Your Dream Job](#fydj)
* [How to Market Yourself with a Strong Technical Resume](#htmywastr)
* [Building Your Professional Network](#bypn)
* [Newcomer Session](#ns)
* ["Are we there yet...?"](#awty)
* [Keynote: Nora Denzel](#keynote)
* [How to Influence Without Authority and Why it is Important](#htiwaawiii)
* [Working Together Apart](#wta)

## <a id="fydj"></a> Finding Your Dream Job

[cra-w.org](cra-w.org) computer research association

> pay attention to what you like to do

**What matters? values**
- Freedom & flexibility in what problem you tackle and when/where you work
- teaching? location? research?
- consider your significant other

**What do employers value?**
- research university & company (lab)
	- publish papers (top conferences)
	- great letters
	- leadership ability/spark
- teaching college
	- papers in conferences
	- teaching experience & enthusiasm
- development
	- technical expertise (programming)
	- papers on topics they need
- government lab
	- no teaching

**The Application Process**
- annual cycle (academic jobs)
- SIGCSE mailing list
- Job packet
	- teaching statement
	- research statement: 3-5 pages of what you've done and what you'll do
	- cover letters: how do you fit 
	- recommendation letters (networking!)
	- *get feedback on these*

**Life notes**
- take care of yourself
- be prepared to feel uneasy
- focus on what you can control

**Interview Process**
- Phone interview
	- research caller
	- land line!
- Site visit w/ individuals
	- talk to the students
	- ask questions too!
- Site presentation! research talk/demo
- Before/during/after
	- meals/social interactions are tests too
	- follow-up thank you notes
- *convince them you'll improve their life, job*

**Technical Talk**
- smart, but general audience
- start general w/ motivation then explain tech and make it sound difficult

**Interviews**
- *don't let them do all the talking!* they need to remember you

**Learing about the culture**
- Collegiality & culture
	- who do you collaborate with?
	- what do you do for fun?
	- what does it take to be successful?
	- what would you change?
- Students
	- undergraduate attitude
	- where do PhDs go?
	- how are grad students supported?
- The college/university
	- why is this job available?
	- dean's attitude
	- department decisions
- Research culture
	- what hours do you work?
	- what does it take to be successful?
	- grant expectations?

**Negotiate!**
- starting date
- salary
- travel

> - *get everything in writing!!!*
> - If you don't heard the word 'no' you're not asking for enough
> - Dream job may need to start with the 'good enough' job

**Q: not looking for a full time job? how to negotiate**
- Maybe don't start there. 50% time is probably more like 30 Hours

**Q: What if you don't fith the mold?**
- Sell what you are as an advantage. Make sure you really commit to one department (and wait for tenure). Each school will see you differently, so go with it. But don't be something you're not.

**Q: Spouses?**
- talk honestly, have a plan-b if things aren't working out

## <a id="htmywastr"></a> How to Market Yourself With a Strong Technical Résumé

Technical Branding & Networking (w/ someone from LinkedIn)

1. Resume & web presence (for scouts)
2. Recruiter - passion, fit, articulate your interests and show your personality
3. Phone screen - be prepared! research the company & job and use it to practice
4. Onsite interviews - technical, be comfortable on the white board

Have a complete LinkedIn profile! look at others
- projects, links, impacts/metrics

**Networking**
- keep contacts up-to-date
- alumni pages
- keep in touch! solid relationships
- friends of friends
- groups/company pages
- leverage your networks
- referrals work
- take as many interviews as possible

### Writing the Résumé

**Objectives**
- define you professionally
	- talents
	- skills
	- experience
	- interests
- marketing / personal brand
- position yourself for the job you want
- differentiate yourself

**Fundamentals**
- name & contact info 
- LinkedIn profile link
- professional email alias
- clean spelling & grammar
- Format
	- organized
	- consistent

**It's all about ME!**
- what *you* did in a project
- *your* individual contribution
- problem that was solved
- value added
- positive result
- what you learned
- *tie efforts into bigger picture and overall value-added*

> avoid detailed task lists!!!

- where did you apply technical skills
- quantify maybe: lines of code, test cases written
- high impact words
	- Helped --> Enabled
	- Added --> Enhanced
	- Wrote --> Defined, Developed
- Be authentic to your personal brand, not embellished / what you think they want
- highlight areas where you stood out as a leader

**Leadership**
- took action to add value
- initiative for additional responsibility
- resolved conflict
- motivated
- roles in clubs

**What did you contribute?**
- what value did you add?
- what did you learn?

### Personal Brand
How do you want employers to see you? What kind of person are you? Where do you want employers to put you?
Have a 3rd party read your résumé and summarize what they took away

> cover letters are dead (apparently)

Add links!

**Q: What if you haven't done that much, (don't have experience or aren't exactly qualified)?**
- Mark where you had potential and list your strengths & learning opportunities you used

**Q: Add school projects?** 
- totally!

> What will light you up (to bring up in an interview)? what are your passions, what excites you?

## <a id="bypn"></a> Buliding Your Professional Network

> If you do good work, fame, funding, promotions, etc. will follow

### FALSE

**Networking Establishes your Brand**
- I know who she is, I know what she does or what she's good at
- sources for new ideas, collaborations, recommendations, internships, job interviews, program committees, invites to talks
- think about what you give. grad students -> undergrads
- think about who you can mentor, not just what you can get out of it
- Horizontal vs. Vertical Networking

**Networking is a skill**
- elevator speech
- set goals to get yourself to network
- talk to those around you
- prepare for an event 
	- offer to help
- introvert or extrovert?
- face-to-face or online
- follow through
	- business cards! follow through notes

Everyone can have a conversation with other people... but what is the point? How is networking different from having a converstation?
- How can I help you?
- Set a goal for the social activity... three new people
- Elevator speech as an ice breaker (talk about yourself)

Increase networking effectivness by writing down next steps
- name
- where are you from
- what are you doing

**Networking is a Relationship**
- keep in touch
- write down next steps

**Why bother?**
- There will be a day when you know two people who need to get connected
- some day you will need people to help you
- run a conference maybe?

**Lessons from their experience**
- force yourself to get out of your comfort zone and approach people
- open source is a great way to network
	- developer
	- tester
	- power user
	- UI person
- regional meetups (systers)
- conferences, local talks (give a talk!)

## <a id="ns"></a> Newcomer Session

### Grace Hopper
- Big risk = big reward
> A ship in the port is safe, but that is not what ships are built for

### Anita Borg
bring women from the lab to be connected to the world

**advice**
- leave some time for informal networking
- people are willing to talk to you
- go on excursions
- barriers to women advancement: social capital and networking
- identify what you connected with people about, then check/follow up

## <a id="awty"></a> "Are we there yet...?"

- how many woment graduate with STEM degrees? We don't see this % throughout the pipeline
- each woman needs to decide to have an impact and make a difference
- are you in the best place for you? do you have the support?

## <a id="keynote"></a> Keynote: Nora Denzel

- decided at 16 to persue a career in CS because of programming on an old computer

> *Error messages*
- `WHAT` := syntax error
- `HOW` := arithmatic error
- `SORRY` := other, memory error

- find your passion
- 5% of senior technical leaders are women
- 25% of jobs in computing are women 
- women are 57% of professional workforce
- a decade ago women were 30% of technical/computing workforce

**Why is it so important to have women in computing?**
- gender diverse teams make better decisions (good for economy)
- men & women think differently
- make better products
- good for 
	- economy
	- society

> engagement rings are the "world's smallest hand cuffs"

### Longevity: Stay for more than 10 years
1. it is all in your attitude
	- "your attitude is like a flat tire, if you don't change it, you're not going anywhere"
	- career path = career obstacle course
	- things are happening FOR me (not to me)
2. You need feel comfortable with being uncomfortable
	- you may be out of place, but stick it out
	- comfort OR growth, can't do both at the same time
3. Act as if ______.
	- for what ever you need to do
	- courage is being able to act even when you are scared, not that you aren't scared

	> "Act your way into a new way of thinking, not think your way into a new way of acting." Stay out of your head!
4. Control your career PR agent: it's you!!
	- every time you open your mouth it is a press release
	- be careful and deliberate, say "Thank you" – and stop!

	> "Frying bacon when you're naked. You know it's going to hurt, just not where."
	> "Always tell the truth, just not so much of it."
5. it takes a village
	- don't be in your career alone both inside and outside of work
	- have a network
		- what you know
		- who you know
		- *who knows what your know*

### Recruiting: recruit one woman per year
1. you can wear anything you want
2. they feed you all the time
3. you get awesome swag
4. the money is good. they pay 30% more than other industries and the gender wage gap is smaller
5. you have the opportunity to really change the world. so much that they can't imagine going back

> "Ships in the port are safe, but that's not what ships are made for." – Grace Hopper

## <a id="htiwaawiii"></a> How To Influence Without Authority And Why It Is Important

How many have the need to influence? How many have the authority to influence?

**Q: What do you need influence for?**
- get people assigned to my team
- get boss to approve budget
- incentivise the team to do their best, be productive
- sell people on your work to make the right choice
- *you need relationships to be able to influence*

**Q: How to build relationships?**
- time in the hallway
- do your job well, good reputation
- establish a trust relationship, align your thinking
- *trust takes time & consistency, but is very fragile*
- follow through on what you say you are going to do
- if you think you've come to a conclusion, restate it and make sure you are both on the same page
- reciprocity is important. support others if you want them to support you

*consistency: over time. not just a one-off thing*

**Q: How do introverts influence?**
- Fake it till you make it
- quiet leadership: make sure you are giving the right impression
- do your job/homework, it will become natural

**Q: How do you influence people? what strategies?**
- be able to summarize and be concise
- data driven
- know your audience and tailor the data you give
	- why are they your audience?
- what is in it for them?
	- easier for people to buy in
- ask short questions and give people a chance to say what/where they are
	- open endede/non-leading questions
	- engage the person
- present it in a way that it resonates with them

**Q: What is your dominant style to influencing? The default strategy**
- good listening skills
- *never be blindsided in a meeting*
- good basis in logic
	- what reason will appeal to them?
- figure out what the best way to communicate is
	- phone/IM/email
- logical pesuation type, systemmatic
- *but logical proof doesn't always over rule the emotional*

**Q: Who do you influence?**
- other members of your team
- your managers
- people in other divisions
- partners
- customers
- **Everyone**
- *all for different reasons*

**Q: What about people who work for you?**
- let them know what they are doing and why. it is better for them to understand the final outcome
- team should feel like they are the source of the solution/plan

**Q: How do people feel when they notice someone influencing them? Is it awkward? bad?**
- maybe try to make it mutually benefitial
- know what you are asking and why. The answer may be "you are not ready yet." so you then need to ask "what is my next step?"
- initiative/incentive is usually welcome, just watch your method approach

**Q: Influence and not manipulation**
- how you frame the request, make sure it is a two way conversation
- it depends on how you're perceived

**Q: Who do you influence? How do you find those people?**

**Q: How to deal with someone who conciously weilds authority/power?**
- find others who work well with them
- really sell it to them and how it will benefit them
- their ego is their teddybear, don't take it away
- as long as you don't care who gets the credit, you can get a lot done

**Q: How important is it to be likeable?**

- friendship can help, but that isn't the only way to get things done

**Q: What if there is someone you don't like?**
- make it a growth opportunity to figure out howe to make it work
- take the high road, be mature and professional

**Q: Examples of unsuccessful attempts?**
- always an opportunity to learn
- some ideas may be bigger than one conversation, so keep trying
- maybe your goals and the company's may not be the some
	- move on? stay? figure out how to make the next idea successful

**Q: Speedy influencing (small time window)**
- how you show up, first impressions
- understand them and their goals, then they will be receptive

**Q: How to strongly influence others without being a bitch?**
- you can't control that, move on
- what about your idea is so motivating to you, why are you so passionate?
- get some allies so you aren't alone

**Q: How do you have hallway converstations when working from home?**
- have at least one face-to-face meeting (not just video)
- find that personal connection
	- otherwise all contact will be just about work, and at best that is neutral, at worst negative
- make time to chat

**Q: positive influence/motivation?**

- figure out what they want and what they like

## <a id="wta"></a> Working Together Apart

Work today is increasingly distributed because we can and because experts are remote

**Collaboration success wizard**
- are your distance collaborations successful? why, why not?
- what you can change
- 45 questions about a particular project
- shows strengths and vulnerabilities

> "Collaboratories"

1. nature of work
2. common ground
3. collaboration readiness
4. management and organization
5. technical readiness 

*really good stuff esp. w/ dealing with other cultures. get the book!*

- project management is important
	- divide up the work
	- face-to-face
- trust and bonding
- roles and responsibilities
- _Culture Shock_ wirtten by expats

**Know what you don't know**
- put the "green bean" in the room
- ask the quetion "what do you mean?"

**Q: Better to relocate or deal w/ the distance?**
it is easier to be an american for an hour, not for your life

