---
title: Unix and Git
category: notes
layout: notes
---

# Unix and Git
{:.no_toc}

***NY&chi; --- Elsa Gonsiorowski --- April 16, 2016***

## Useful Links

| Link                                                                              | Description                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Babun](http://babun.github.io)                                                   | Unix shell on Windows                                           |
| Interactive: [Try Git](http://try.github.io)                                      | Basic Git commands, from GitHub                                 |
| [GitHub](http://github.com)                                                       | GitHub: social coding and free hosting for open source software |
| [GitHub for Education](http://education.github.com)                               | Access to the Student Developer                                 |
| Interactive: [Advanced Git Commands](http://pcottle.github.io/learnGitBranching/) | Advanced Git: branching & more                                  |
| [Homebrew](http://brew.sh)                                                        | Package manager for Mac                                         |
| [Gonsie's Dot Files](http://github.com/gonsie/dotfiles)                           | You've seen it live, now try it for yourself                    |

## Overview
{:.no_toc}

* this will become a table of contents
{:toc}

## Unix and the Command Line

Understanding and using the command line is a key skill for any computer user.
The <mark>command line interface (CLI)</mark>[^1] is the original way in which humans interacted with computers.
This interaction is done through the <mark>shell</mark>.
It is no longer necessary to use computers in this way since most tasks can be accomplished through the GUI[^2].
Nevertheless, the command line interface remains the most common, easiest to use, and best supported way in which expericenced users accomplish daily tasks.

### Installation

In general the Mac OS is a Unix operating system, one that is very similar to Linux operating systems.
Windows, on the other hand, is a DOS-based operating system which is very different from -nix.
For any of these systems, there is a built-in application for the interacting with your computer via a CLI.

#### Mac Installation

You're in luck!
Since Mac OS is based upon Unix, there is nothing for you install.
To access the command line interface, simply run the Terminal application.
The Terminal application can be found in the Utilities folder inside the Application folder.

#### Linux Installation

Just like a Mac, you are working with a -nix based system and there is nothing new to install!
To access the command line interface, simply run the Terminal application.
The Terminal application can most likely be found where ever your other Applications exist.

#### Windows Installation

Since Windows is not a -nix-based operating system, the command line interface that comes with your machince is vastly different from a -nix shell.
For your own information, the Windows CLI is called [PowerShell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_PowerShell).
For this workshop you will need to install a -nix-like interface for your computer.

***Step 1: Install Babun***

[Babun](http://babun.github.io) is an open source project which brings the Unix command line to your Windows machine.

Download Babun Here: <http://projects.reficio.org/babun/download>.

This project is built on top of the popular [Cygwin](http://cygwin.com) project.
If you already have Cygwin installed, it is not necessary to install Babun, but you can.
The two projects will not clash.

***Step 2: ???***

As you may have noticed, I do not have a Windows machine.
Thus, I do not know what step 2 is.
You probably need to run an installer?
See what happens and, if you want, let me know the important steps so I can share those with others.

### Commands on the Command Line

Welcome to the command line interface!
You are probably staring a big blank box with some text in the upper left corner, maybe something like:

```
MyMacBook:~ elsa$
```

Hit the Enter or return key.
You should see the same text appear over and over.
This text is called the <mark>prompt</mark>.
It is very common to have `$` or `>` symbol at the end of your prompt text, indicating where you will enter commands.

#### Lingo

| Command | Arugment | Option | Argument for Option | Another Option |
|---------+----------+--------+---------------------+----------------|
| g++     | main.cpp | -o     | main.out            | -W             |


<mark>Commands</mark> take <mark>arguments</mark> and have <mark>options</mark>.
One-letter options usually start with a single dash (`-`) while multi-letter options start with two dashes (`--`).
Options may also take an argument.

#### Bread-and-Butter Commands

| Example Usage                 | Description                                             |
|-------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------|
| `ls ~/Desktop`                | list files (on the desktop)                             |
| `pwd`                         | present working directory, or, where am I?              |
| `cd ~/Desktop`                | change directory (to the desktop)                       |
| `mkdir FOLDER`                | make a directory (called FOLDER)                        |
| `cat notes.txt`               | concatenate the contents (of notes.txt) to the terminal |
| `echo "hello"`                | repeat after me                                         |
| `cp notes.txt notes-copy.txt` | make a copy (of notes.txt to new file notes-copy.txt)   |
| `mv notes-copy.txt tmp.txt`   | move the file (renames notes-copy.txt to tmp.txt)       |
| `man git`                     | read the man pages (about the git command)              |
| `rm notes.txt`                | remove (the notes.txt file)                             |

#### Learning More About Commands

Almost all commands come with either a `-h` or `--help` option.
Sometimes, the text is more detailed in the "longer" `--help` option.
The manual for each command, called the <mark>man pages</mark>, are also installed.
These are accessed by the command `man`.

#### Try it!

Get to know the commands on your own by trying to accomplish the following tasks:

- When you open a new terminal window, where are you?
  This is called your <mark>home</mark> directory.
- Make a new folder on the desktop.
  What happens if you try to put a space in the name of the folder?
- Use any software you choose to write a file in your new folder.
  - How can you see the contents of the file?
  - Can you move that file to a new folder?
- Does your computer have the `open` command?
  If so, what does it do?

### Filenames and Paths

### Redirection

### Dotfiles

As you may have seen through the `ls` command, there are several *hidden* files in your file system.
These filenames usually begin with a dot (`.`), such as `.gitconfig` or `.gitignore`.
To list all files in a directory, including the hidden files, use `ls -A`.

## Shells

### Bash: Bourne Again Shell[^4]

Bash is the default shell on most Linux and Unix systems (including Mac OS).

### Fish: Friendly Interactive Shell

[Fish](http://fishshell.com)

### Zsh: Z Shell

## Git

Git is a program for <mark>version tracking</mark>.
It tracks the changes that you (and others) make to files within a <mark>repository</mark>.

### Installing Git

The installation step for any software package or application depends on the machine where it is being installed[^3].
The "official" instructions for installing Git on your system can be found [here](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git).

To test if you have git installed, type the `git` command into your terminal.
If you **do** have git installed, you will see a long messages describing how to use the git program.
The message starts with:

```
usage: git [--version] [--help] [-C <path>] [-c name=value]
           [--exec-path[=<path>]] [--html-path] [--man-path] [--info-path]
           [-p | --paginate | --no-pager] [--no-replace-objects] [--bare]
           [--git-dir=<path>] [--work-tree=<path>] [--namespace=<name>]
           <command> [<args>]
    ...
```

#### Mac Installation

If you tried the `git` command in your terminal and you **do not** have git installed on you system, a message will display with details about how to install it.

#### Linux Installation

If you are running a Linux machine, you should open your Terminal application and install git through your package manager.

On a Fedora system the command is:
```
$ sudo yum install git-all
```

On a Debian-based system, such as Ubuntu, the command should be:
```
$ sudo apt-get install git-all
```

#### Windows Installation

If you used the instructions above to install Babun, you are all set!
If you would like to install git at a system-level, follow the ["official" instructions](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git#Installing-on-Windows).

### Command Line Git

Git, as a command line tool, is a program which takes its own set of commands.

#### Man Pages

The git program on your computer which takes it own set of commands.
Thus, `man git` may not contain useful information about a particular git command.
Instead, you can lookup `man git-init` or `man git-pull`.

### Setting Up Your Computer

When you make a commit, some additional information is automatically recorded, including:

- Date and Time
- Author of the Commit (you!)
- Author's email address

To configure the *global* git settings for your computer, type the following:

```
$ git config --global user.name "My Full Name"
$ git config --global user.email myemail@domain.com
```

### Git GUIs

I believe that learning git on the command line

Now that you know the basics of the git commands, you can understand what the GUI's are doing for you.


## GitHub

[GitHub.com](http://github.com) has become *the* place for sharing code and hosting open source software projects.
Employers have started asking for GitHub usernames when recruiting new employees.

Like any social platform, you can *follow* your favorite users and *star* your favorite repositories.

### Try Git

If you want to get some more experience with git, use GitHub's interactive [Try Git](http://try.github.io) demo.

### Pages

[GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com) are an easy way to create and host a website.
GitHub lets you create a website for each user and repository.

GitHub supports <mark>static sites</mark> generated with [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com).
Static sites (as opposed to dynamic sites) are usually simple, text-based websites that do not require databases or other advanced/backend features.

### Education

If you have a `.edu` email address, you can take advantage of the [GitHub for Education](http://education.github.com) program.
This program includes the [Student Developer Pack](https://education.github.com/pack), with discounts on many software packages and cloud services.
Some of the best discounts include:

- **Free GitHub Micro Account**
  As long as you are a student you can have up to 5 private GitHub repositories for FREE (usually $7/month)
- **$50 Credit on Digital Ocean**
  Host your applications in the cloud!
  Or set up a personal VPN for all of your devices for increased security while using the internet.
- **Credit at Namecheap.com**
  Get a year of your own domain name!
  This works perfectly with your GitHub hosted website.

### Desktop

[GitHub Desktop](http://desktop.github.com) is a GUI interface for git which automatically connects to GitHub.com.


## Footnotes

[^1]: [Wikipedia: command line interfaces and the shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface)

[^2]: [Wikipedia: GUI or Graphical User Interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface)

[^3]: Requiring machine-specific installation instructions can be a pain for programmers.
      Recently, programmers have been able to take advantage operating-system-level virtualizations called <mark>containers</mark>, such as [Docker](https://www.docker.com).
      Containers serve as way to specify the dependencies of a certain piece of software and abstract the need to specify the underlying hardware.

[^4]: [Wikipedia: Bash (Unix shell)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell))
