---
title: "Don't be afraid of eshell"
layout: post
categories:
tags:
- emacs
- eshell
---

One of the reasons I decided to switch to emacs was the ability to embed a terminal window directly within my editor.
Before last week, I never got the embedded terminal working and never really gave eshell much of a try.
Initially, I tried to setup my regular shell ([fish](https://fishshell.com)), but that never quite worked correctly.
I also learned the power of dired and haven't had the need to use the command line quite as much.
Then, last week, I found myself editing and re-compiling code in a tight loop.
I wanted access to the terminal, to trigger compilation, without leaving emacs.
I created a quick-and-dirty eshell setup&#x2026; and then wondered why I hadn't done this sooner.


## What is eshell?

Emacs shell, or eshell, presents bash-like command line interface built directly on emacs.
It tries to be the best of two worlds:

1.  An elisp REPL wherein elisp commands can be directly executed
2.  A command line interface similar to `bash`

By understanding that eshell is presenting emacs in a terminal/shell sort of way, I can choose if I want to execute a command the elisp or bash way.
More details can be found on the [eshell page in the emacs manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/eshell.html).


## Bare Minimum

First things first: to launch an eshell terminal, run `M-x eshell`.

Next, there are 2 things I need to have a basic, functioning shell environment:

1.  Have the correct PATH
2.  Have my most used aliases


### Path

The `PATH` variable used by eshell is exposed through the `addpath` command.
Without any arguments, `addpath` simply prints out the directories currently in `PATH`.
When called with one or more arguments, `addpath` will append these paths to your `PATH`.
There is no need to include the current `PATH` contents, as `addpath` always appends.


### Aliases

Eshell has a number of built in commands, which are similar to the [bash builtins](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/bash/manual/bash.html#Shell-Builtin-Commands).
The most useful command is `alias`, which can be used to create any commands that you are used to using in your regular shell.
The first step for me was to figure out which aliases I use most often and add them to eshell.

First, I needed the `ls` alternative that I use.
Luckily, there is an `ls` provided by eshell (shown by running `which ls`).
It takes the same arguments as my Mac's builtin version.

Next, I needed a way to open an emacs buffer with a specific file.
I use the command `em` to launch a new emacs session within my terminal window (`emacs -nw`).
The alias for eshell is slightly different, since I am *already* running an emacs session.
I simply want to start editing a particular file.
Thus, the alias makes a call to the emacs function `find-file`.

My alias file (`~/.emacs.d/eshell/alias`) looks like this:

{% highlight eshell %}
alias la ls -AFGhl $1
alias em find-file $1
{% endhighlight %}


## Next Steps

The bare minimum takes care of my most frequent use case.
Now, I can compile code without switching away from emacs!

The next step for me is to add the aliases to [dotfiles](https://github.com/gonsie/dotfiles) and continue to improve my eshell setup.
A quick web search lead me to a literate config for eshell in [howardabrams/dot-files](https://github.com/howardabrams/dot-files/blob/master/emacs-eshell.org).
There are several settings here that I will have to add for myself.
