---
title: "Sending Email from Org Mode"
layout: post
categories:
tags:
- emacs
- orgmode
- mac
- applescript
- email
---
Every so often, I need to generate a bunch of form emails.
Often, I'm sending the same email to multiple groups of people and I want use variables, such as `$first_name`, in the text.
While I'm sure there a number of online services which could achieve this for me, I really don't need to set up a fancy campaign or use tracking.
Plus, I'm wary of submitting others' emails to a third party.

Of course, I've used Emacs to do this, using org mode and AppleScript.


## Overview

To approach this task I start with a single org file.
Getting AppleScript executing from an org block is trickier than I would like.
Instead, I write the script whole cloth in my org file and tangle it out to a separate `.scpt` file.
I store the data in my file as a table.
I then use a bash block, which takes the data through `:var`, to loop over running the script.


## AppleScript for Email

I've never formally learned AppleScript, but some searching on StackOverFlow and trial-and-error can get you pretty far.
Mac OS X has a built in editor found in `/Applications/Utilities/Script Editor`.
Once you've opened the editor, you can browse the dictionary with `File > Open Dictionary...`.
This dictionary lists all the classes and commands for different applications.
The AppleScript language itself looks like natural language and is relatively easy to understand&#x2026; especially once someone else has properly constructed the program.

For my email-sender script, I store the AppleScript source is as a block.
This block is tangled (`C-c C-v C-t`) to a `.scpt` file.
The first half of this script sets some variables, including the body of the email message.
The second half creates the message and sets a "to" recipient (could also set a "cc" recipient).

{% highlight applescript %}
#+NAME: script
#+BEGIN_SRC apples :tangle email.scpt
on run argv
   set varName  to item 1 of argv
   set varEmail to item 2 of argv
   set varBody  to "Hello " & varName & ",

Blah blah blah. Lor ipsum, etc.

Sincerely,
Elsa"

   tell application "Mail"
        set theMessage to make new outgoing message with properties {subject: "Email", content: varBody, visible:true}
        tell theMessage
             make new to recipient with properties {name:varName, address:varEmail}
             #send
        end tell
   end tell
end run
#+END_SRC
{% endhighlight %}

Note that I've commented out the `send` command and set the message property `visible: true`.
This means that the draft emails appear in the Mail GUI, but do not get automatically sent.
This allows me to do trial runs before spamming my recipients.


## Filling the Variables

Once I have the script and email body written, I know what variables I'll need to fill in.
The next step is to put all the data into a named org table.
I usually do this data formatting by hand since I'm bringing together data items from many different sources.

{% highlight nil %}
#+NAME: data
|    Name    |      Email      |
|------------|-----------------|
| Mx. Person | person@test.com |
{% endhighlight %}

Since I tangle the email sending AppleScript program, I need to run it from the command line.
I call the script once for each row in the data table using a bash loop and variable arrays.
Then, I use `C-c C-c` to run the bash loop and generate the emails.

{% highlight bash %}
#+BEGIN_SRC bash :var name=data[,0] email=data[,1]
for i in `seq 0 0`; do
osascript matchmail.scpt "${name[$i]}" "${email[$i]}"
done
#+END_SRC
{% endhighlight %}

Note that I do not calculate the total number of data items / rows.
That would take way too much bash magic for this simple example.
Also, if you want to test the variables with an `echo` statement, use `:results output` as an argument to the org block.


## Hitting Send

I usually choose to manually hit send on each individual email once I'm satisfied with the script.

I keep all of these org commands in a single `notes.org` file so that I can remember how to recreate the emails (usually a year later when it's time to send them again).
For example, this [notes.org](https://github.com/womeninhpc/mentoring/blob/master/notes.org) file sends introduction emails for a mentoring program I organized with Women in HPC.
